---
layout: post
title: "[Hanumanthu] Rings and Fields - II"
author: "Karthik"
categories: journal
tags: [documentation,sample]
---

[Link to part-1](https://bvenkatakarthik.github.io/ringsfields)

**ROUGH NOTES** 

**Lec-21**: An ascending chain $I _1 \subseteq I _2 \subseteq \ldots$ of ideals *stabilizes* if $I _m = I _{m+1} = \ldots$ for some $m$; Ring $R$ is Noetherian (ie every ideal is finitely generated) if and only if every ascending chain of ideals stabilizes   
> $\implies$ Let ideals $I _1 \subseteq I _2 \subseteq \ldots.$ Now $\cup I _j$ is an ideal, and of the form $(f _1, \ldots, f _r).$ Taking $f _1 \in I _{n _1}, \ldots, f _r \in I _{n _r}$ and $N := \max n _j$ we see $I _N, I _{N+1}, \ldots$ are all $\cup I _j.$   
> $\impliedby$ Suppose ideal $I$ is not finitely generated. Pick $x _1 \in I.$ As $I \neq (x _1),$ pick $x _2 \in I \setminus \lbrace x _1 \rbrace.$ As $I \neq (x _1, x _2)$, pick $x _3 \in I \setminus \lbrace x _1, x _2 \rbrace,$ and so on. Now $(x _1) \subsetneq (x _1, x _2) \subsetneq (x _1, x _2, x _3) \subsetneq \ldots,$ absurd. 

$\mathscr{C}(\mathbb{R}) = \lbrace \text{continuous maps } f : \mathbb{R} \to \mathbb{R} \rbrace$ isnt Noetherian : For any $A \subseteq \mathbb{R}$, let $Z(A) = \lbrace f \in \mathscr{C}(\mathbb{R}) : f \vert _{A} = 0 \rbrace.$ Now ${Z([1, \infty)) \subsetneq Z([2, \infty)) \subsetneq \ldots}$ 

Subring of a Noetherian ring can be Non-Noetherian. Eg: $\mathbb{R}[x _1, x _2, \ldots ]$ inside its field of fractions; Quotients of Noetherian rings are Noetherian (from correspondence thm); 

**Lec-22**: [*Hilbert Basis Thm*] If $R$ is Noetherian, so is $R[x]$   
*Pf*: Suppose ideal $I \subseteq R[x]$ isnt finitely generated. As $I \neq (0),$ pick an $f _1$ of least degree (among nonzero elems) in $I.$ As $I \neq (f _1)$, pick an $f _2$ of least degree in $I \setminus (f _1).$ As $I \neq (f _1, f _2),$ pick an $f _3$ of least degree in $I \setminus (f _1, f _2),$ and so on.   
> Especially $\underbrace{\deg(f _1)} _{d _1} \leq \underbrace{\deg(f _2)} _{d _2} \leq \ldots$  

Let $a _i := \text{lc}(f _i)$ be the leading coeffs. From the chain $(a _1) \subseteq (a _1, a _2) \subseteq \ldots$, we have ${(a _1, \ldots, a _N) = \cup _{j \geq 1} (a _1, \ldots, a _j) = (a _1, a _2, \ldots)}$ for some $N.$   
Now $a _{N+1} \in (a _1 , \ldots, a _N),$ so $a _{N+1} = \sum _{1} ^{N} b _j a _j.$   
Consider ${g := b _1 (f _1 x ^{d _{N+1} - d _1}) + \ldots + b _{N} (f _{N} x ^{d _{N+1} - d _N})}$ : It has degree $d _{N+1},$ leading coeff $a _{N+1},$ and is in $(f _1, \ldots, f _{N}).$   
So $g - f _{N+1}$ has degree $\lt d _{N+1},$ and is $\not\in (f _1, \ldots, f _{N}).$ Absurd.

**Lec-23**: [**For integral domains. Also exclude 0 from consideration**] Divisors; Proper divisors $(b$ is a proper divisor of $a$ if for some $c,$ $a = bc$ and neither of $b,c$ are units); Associates $(a,b$ are associates if $a = bc$ for some unit $c$); Irreducible elem (nonunit with no proper divisors); $a$ is called prime if $(a)$ is a prime ideal.   
> In ideal language (after discarding $0$) : "$a$ is a unit" is $(a) = (1)$; "$b$ divides $a$" is $(a) \subseteq (b)$; "$b$ is a proper divisor of $a$" is $(a) \subsetneq (b) \subsetneq (1)$;  "$a,b$ are associates" is $(a) = (b)$; "$a$ is irreducible" is "$(a) \subsetneq (1)$ and there is no $b$ with $(a) \subsetneq (b) \subsetneq (1)$"; "$a$ is prime" is "$(a)$ is prime". 

Eg: In $\mathbb{Z}$, units are $\lbrace \pm 1 \rbrace,$ primes and irreducibles are both $\lbrace \pm 2, \pm 3, \pm 5, \ldots \rbrace.$   
$2 \in \mathbb{Z}[\sqrt{-5}]$ is irreducible but not prime.   
> Irreducibility : Say $a+b\sqrt{-5}$ divides $2$ in $\mathbb{Z}[\sqrt{-5}],$ ie $2 = (a+b\sqrt{-5})x$ for some $x$ in the ring. Taking $\vert \ldots \vert ^{2},$ we see $a ^2 + 5b ^2$ divides $4$ in the usual sense, ie $a ^2 + 5b ^2 = 1 \text{ or } 2 \text{ or } 4.$ Casework gives $(a,b) = (\pm 1, 0), (\pm 2, 0)$ are the only solutions. So $2$ has no proper divisors in $\mathbb{Z}[\sqrt{-5}].$ Its also not a unit (direct check).   
> Primality : $(1+\sqrt{-5}), (1-\sqrt{-5}) \not\in (2),$ but their product is in $(2).$ 

**Lec-24**: In an integral domain primes are irreducible : Let prime $p = ab.$ Then $p \vert a$ or $p \vert b.$   
If $p \vert a$ : $a = px$ gives $p = (px)b,$ so $b$ is a unit.   
If $p \vert b$ : $b = py$ gives $p = a(py),$ so $a$ is a unit.   
So one of the factors must be a unit, ie $p$ is irreducible.

 In an integral domain, $\gcd(a,b)$ is a $d$ with : $(d \vert a, d \vert b),$ and $(e \vert a, e \vert b \implies e \vert d).$ This can be rewritten as "$(d) \supseteq (a) + (b),$ and $(e) \supseteq (a)+(b) \implies (e) \supseteq (d)$".   
 So $\text{gcd}(a,b)$ is considered only upto the ideal generated by it (ie upto associates). 
 > GCD may not exist : Take $a = 6, b = 2 + 2 \sqrt{-5}$ in $\mathbb{Z}[\sqrt{-5}].$ Both $2, 1+\sqrt{-5}$ are common divisors, so had there existed a gcd $d,$ it divides $2, 1+\sqrt{-5}.$ Irreducibility of $2$ ensures $(2) = (d).$ But now $(1+\sqrt{-5}) \not\subseteq (2) = (d),$ absurd. 
  
 **Lec-25**: PIDs; $\mathbb{Z}[x]$ isnt a PID. Eg ideal $(2,x)$. If it were principal, say $(2,x) = (f),$ $f$ must be a constant (else $2$ isnt a multiple of $f$), nonzero nonunit. But then all elements of $(2,x)$ have coeffs divisible by this constant, absurd; $k[x _1, x _2]$ isnt a PID. Eg ideal $(x _1, x _2);$ 
 
 In a PID, $\gcd(a,b)$ exists for all $a,b$ : Ideal $(a) + (b) = (d).$ Now $d$ is gcd. 
 
 In a PID, irreducibles are primes too : Let $a$ be an irreducible (esp $(a) \neq (1)$). There is no $b$ with $(a) \subsetneq (b) \subsetneq (1),$ and since all ideals are of this form $(p),$ we see $(a)$ is maximal. Hence prime.   
 > Alt: Suppose $xy \in (a).$ Consider gcd $(a,x) = (d).$ Since this divides $a$ and $a$ is irred, $(d) = (1) \text{ or } (a).$   
 > If former : $ra + sx = 1,$ so $y = r{\color{purple}{a}}y + s{\color{purple}{xy}} \in (a).$   
 > If latter : $x \in (a,x) = (a).$  
 
 In a PID, nonzero prime ideals are maximal too : Let $\mathfrak{p} \neq 0$ be a prime ideal. Its $(p)$ for some $p.$ As primes are irreducible, there is no $b$ with $(p) \subsetneq (b) \subsetneq (1),$ and as any ideal looks like $(f),$ we see $(p)$ is maximal. That is, $\mathfrak{p}$ is maximal. 
 
 **Lec-26**: 
 
 
 



