---
layout: post
title: "Test"
author: "Karthik"
categories: journal
tags: [documentation,sample]
---

[Link to lectures](https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLEAYkSg4uSQ3AaON5oCbS6ecwKsoopBN3)

**ROUGH NOTES**

**Lec-1**: Rings (Well, commutative rings with unity. So no to matrix rings). Eg : $\mathbb{Z}, \mathbb{Q}, \mathbb{Z}[i] := \lbrace x + iy : x,y \in \mathbb{Z} \rbrace$ are rings. $\mathbb{Z}[\frac{1}{2}]:= \lbrace x + \frac{y}{2} : x,y \in \mathbb{Z} \rbrace$ isn't, as it has $\frac{1}{2}$ but not $\frac{1}{2} \cdot \frac{1}{2} = \frac{1}{4}$; Subrings (subgrps of $(R, +)$ closed under mult and *containing $1_R$*)

**Lec-2**: Some definitions of rings don't require presence of unity (There for instance $2\mathbb{Z} \subseteq \mathbb{Z}$ is considered a subring. Not here though); For $n\in \mathbb{Z}_{\geq 0}$, $\mathbb{Z}/{n\mathbb{Z}}$ is a ring; $\mathscr{C}(\mathbb{R}) = \lbrace \text{continuous maps } f:\mathbb{R} \to \mathbb{R} \rbrace$ is a ring; Units (invertible elements, wrt multiplication); Fields (Rings where every nonzero elem is invertible) 

**Lec-3**: For $n\in \mathbb{Z}_{\gt 0}$, $\mathbb{Z}/{n\mathbb{Z}}$ is a field if and only if $n$ is prime ($\implies$: Say $n$ were composite, ie $n=kl$ for some $1 \lt k,l \lt n$. Then $[k], [l] \neq [0]$ but $[k][l]=[kl] = [0]$, absurd.  $\impliedby$: Let $n=p$ a prime. Given $[x]\neq [0]$, notice $\mathbb{Z}/p \to \mathbb{Z}/p$ given by $[t] \mapsto [x][t]$ is injective : else $[x][t_1] = [x][t_2]$ for some $0 \leq t_1 \lt t_2 \leq p-1$, so $p \vert (t_2 - t_1)x$, but neither $p \vert x$ nor $p\vert (t_2 - t_1)$, absurd. So the map is bijective, ensuring a $y$ such that $[x][y] = [1]$ ); Units in $\mathbb{Z}[i]$ are $\lbrace \pm 1, \pm i \rbrace$ (Say $z = a+bi \in \mathbb{Z}[i]$ is a unit. So $zw=1$ for some $w$ in the ring. So $\vert z \vert^2 = (a ^2 + b ^2)$ divides $1$, ie $(a,b) \in \lbrace (1,0), (-1,0), (0,1), (0,-1) \rbrace$, ie $z \in \lbrace \pm 1, \pm i \rbrace$. Also all of $\lbrace \pm 1, \pm i \rbrace$ are units). Especially $\mathbb{Z}[i]$ is not a field; Given a ring $R$, forming the polynomial ring $R[x]$

**Lec-4**: Ring structure of $R[x]$; Identifying elems of $R$ with constant polynomials in $R[x]$ we get subring $R \hookrightarrow R[x]$; Division by monic polynomials : For $f,g \in R[x]$ with $g$ monic, there exist unique $q, r \in R[x]$ such that "$f = gq + r$ and either $r=0$ or $\deg(r) \lt \deg(g)$" (Eg: Division in $\mathbb{Z}[x]$). Monic condition is important, for eg we cant divide $x^2 +1$ by $2x+1$ like above in $\mathbb{Z}[x]$. 

**Lec-5**: For $f\in R[x]$, $\alpha \in R$, dividing $f$ by $(x-\alpha)$ leaves remainder $f(\alpha)$. So especially $(x-\alpha)$ divides $f$ if and only if $f(\alpha)=0$; Ring $R[x_1, \ldots, x_n]$

**Lec-6**: Ring homomorphisms (maps $R \overset{\varphi}{\to} R'$ with $\varphi(a+b) = \varphi(a) + \varphi(b)$, $\varphi(ab) = \varphi(a) \varphi(b)$, and $\varphi(1 _R) = 1 _{R'}$);  Eg : For ring $R$, the only ring homom $\mathbb{Z} \to R$ is $n \mapsto n\bullet 1 _R$; For ring $R$ and $\alpha \in R$, we have ring homom $R[x] \to R$ given by $f(x) \mapsto f(\alpha)$

**Lec-7**: Kernel $\varphi^{-1}(0)$ of a ring homom (Usually not a subring because of lacking $1 _R$. But its an "ideal"); Ideals ([related](https://math.stackexchange.com/a/4019463/303300)); Eg: Kernel of $\mathbb{Z} \to \mathbb{Z}/4, n \mapsto [n]$ is $4\mathbb{Z}$; Kernel of $\mathbb{Z}[x] \to \mathbb{Z}, f\mapsto f(2)$ is $(x-2)\mathbb{Z}[x]$ (because $f$ in kernel iff $f(2)=0$ iff $f$ when divided by $(x-2)$ leaves remainder $0$ iff $f$ is a multiple of $(x-2)$);  Any ideal $I$ of $\mathbb{Z}$ looks like $d\mathbb{Z}$ ($d \in \mathbb{Z} _{\geq 0}$). Pf is by division algorithm : If $I = \lbrace 0 \rbrace$ done, else look at smallest positive elem of $I$ and check its the generator 

**Lec-8**: Examples. $\mathbb{Z}[i] := \lbrace x + iy : x,y \in \mathbb{Z} \rbrace \subseteq \mathbb{C}$ and $\mathbb{Z}[\sqrt{2}] := \lbrace x + y \sqrt{2} : x,y \in \mathbb{Z} \rbrace \subseteq \mathbb{R}$ are rings while $\mathbb{Z}[\frac{1}{2}] := \lbrace x + y \frac{1}{2} : x, y \in \mathbb{Z} \rbrace \subseteq \mathbb{Q}$ isnt; Rational $\frac{a}{b}$ is in reduced form if $a,b \in \mathbb{Z}$, $b \gt 0$ and $a,b$ coprime;

Eg: For int $n \geq 2$, $R_n := \lbrace \frac{a}{b} \in \mathbb{Q} \text{ reduced}: n \nmid b \rbrace$. $R_n$ is a ring $\iff$ $n$ is prime.   
Sol: $\implies$ : If $n$ were composite, $n=kl$ with $1\lt k,l \lt n$. Now $\frac{1}{k}, \frac{1}{l}$ are in $R_n$ but not their product, absurd. (Other direction clear)

Eg: $R := \lbrace \frac{a}{2^n} : a \in \mathbb{Z}, n \in \mathbb{Z}_{\geq 0} \rbrace$ is a ring 

Ring homom injective iff kernel is $\lbrace 0\rbrace$. 

**Lec-9**: Ring $R$ is a field iff only ideals of $R$ are $\lbrace 0\rbrace$ and $R$ ($\implies$: Every ideal $\neq (0)$ has a unit. $\impliedby$: For $x \neq 0$, $(x)$ must be $(1)$ ). Eg: Every ring homom $\mathbb{F}\to R(\neq 0)$ is injective

**Lec-10**: Given ideals $I,J \subseteq R$, ideals $I+J$ (generated by union), $I \cap J$ and $I\cdot J$ (generated by set product $\lbrace ij : i \in I, j \in J \rbrace$); Preimage of an ideal (wrt ring homom) is ideal; Surjective image of an ideal (wrt ring homom) is ideal (Surjectivity important. Eg $\mathbb{Z} \hookrightarrow \mathbb{Q}$); Nilpotents of a ring (elems $a$ with $a^n = 0$ for some $n\gt 0$) form an ideal, called "nilradical"

**Lec-11**: Quotient rings; Eg: For $n \in \mathbb{Z}_{\geq 0}$, quotienting out ideal $n\mathbb{Z}$ in $\mathbb{Z}$ gives $\mathbb{Z}/{n\mathbb{Z}}$

Eg: $\mathbb{R}[X]/{(X^2+1)}$ is isom to $\mathbb{C}$   
Sol: $\mathbb{R}[X]/{(X^2+1)} \to \mathbb{C}$, $[f] = f+(X^2+1) \mapsto f(i)$ is an isomorphism (Well defined : If $[f] = [g]$, ie $f-g \in (X^2 +1)$, putting $X=i$ gives $f(i) = g(i)$; Homomorphism, Surjective : Clear; Injective : Say $[f] = f+(X^2+1)$ is in kernel. Now $f(i) = 0$, hence even $f(\overline{i})= 0$. So both $(X-i), (X+i)$ divide $f$ in $\mathbb{C}[x]$. This gives $f$ is divisible by $(X^2+1)$ in $\mathbb{R}[x]$, ie $[f] = [0]$) 

**Lec-12**: In ring homom $R \overset{\varphi}{\to} R'$, $\varphi(R)$ is a *subring* of $R'$. In fact $R/{\ker(\varphi)} \simeq \varphi(R)$.   
> $\varphi(a) = \varphi(b)$ $\iff \varphi(a-b) = 0$ $\iff a-b \in \ker(\varphi)$ $\iff [a] = [b] \text{ in } R/{\ker(\varphi)}$, so $[a] \mapsto \varphi(a)$ on sets $R/{\ker(\varphi)} \to \varphi(R)$ is a well-defined injection. Its also surjective, ring homom (clear).  

[*Correspondence thm*] Also there is a bijection $\lbrace \text{ideals of }R \text{ containing } \ker(\varphi) \rbrace \leftrightarrow \lbrace \text{ideals of } \varphi(R)\rbrace$, where $I$ in LHS is mapped to $\varphi(I)$.   
Check : Call LHS $\mathbf{A}$ and RHS $\mathbf{B}$. Define $\mathbf{A} \overset{f}{\to} \mathbf{B}$ by $I \mapsto \varphi(I)$, and $\mathbf{B} \overset{g}{\to} \mathbf{A}$ by $J \mapsto \varphi^{-1}(J)$. Clearly $f\circ g = \text{id} _{\mathbf{B}}$. Also $(g \circ f)(I)$, for $I \in \mathbf{A}$, is $\varphi^{-1} (\varphi(I))$ $= \lbrace t \in  R : \varphi(t) = \varphi(i) \text{ for some } i \in I \rbrace$ $=\lbrace t \in R : t - i \in \ker(\varphi) \text{ for some } i \in I \rbrace$ $= I + \ker(\varphi)$ $= I$. So $g \circ f = \text{id} _{\mathbf{A}}$. 

**Lec-13**: Any ideal $\neq (0)$ of $k[x]$ looks like $(f)$ with $f$ monic (Pf like in $\mathbb{Z}$ case : Pick lowest degree monic in the ideal); Eg: Take $\mathbb{R}[x] \to \mathbb{C}$, $f\mapsto f(i)$. This is a surj homom, and its kernel is $\neq (0)$. So kernel looks like $(f)$ for some monic $f$. Now $f$ cant be deg 0 or 1 (check), and $x^2 +1$ is in kernel. So the kernel is $(x^2 +1)$, giving $\mathbb{R}[x]/{(x^2 +1)} \simeq \mathbb{C}$. Also by corresp thm, there are only two ideals of $\mathbb{R}[x]$ containing $(x^2 +1)$, namely $(x^2+1)$ and $\mathbb{R}[x]$ (that is, "$(x^2+1)$ is a maximal ideal"). 

**Lec-14**: Prime ideals (Ideals $I \subseteq R$ for which $R/I$ is integral domain. Equivalently : where $ab \in I$ implies $a\in I$ or $b \in I$). Eg: Prime ideals of $\mathbb{Z}$ are $\lbrace p\mathbb{Z} : p \text{ prime number} \rbrace \cup \lbrace (0)\rbrace$; $(x) \subseteq \mathbb{Q}[x]$ is prime 

**Lec-15**: Integral domains (product of nonzeroes is nonzero); $R$ integral domain $\implies$ $R[X]$ integral domain; Maximal ideal (Ideal $I\subseteq R$ s.t. $R/I$ is a field. Equivalently : ideal $I \subsetneq R$ s.t. the only ideals containing $I$ are $I$ and $R$). Esp. every maximal ideal is prime; Eg: Maximal ideals of $\mathbb{Z}$ are $\lbrace p\mathbb{Z} : p \text{ prime number} \rbrace$

**Lec-16**: For every proper ideal $I$ in $R$, there is a maximal ideal containing it (Pf uses Zorn's lemma)

**Lec-17**: Any finite nontriv integral domain $A$ is a field (Let $a \neq 0$ in $A$. The map $A \to A$ sending $t \mapsto at$ is injective so bijective). Finiteness is important, look at $\mathbb{Z}$; 











