---
layout: post
title: "Life is a Journey"
author: "Iryna"
categories: travel, US
tags: [iryna]
image: 2023-06-05-sawtooth.jpeg
---

Our family has set out on a journey while taking a break from work and busy schedules, a journey with a little less predictability, more unknown and at the same time marvelous and full of wonder nature and overall good experiences during which we would explore our weaknesses and also strengthen our relationships and bodies and maybe find the common unity with people, nature and people in nature.

We are Nikolai, Leopold, Iryna and Chris and we are on a journey. What brought us to this journey may be a combination of our background, some recent life events and current circumstances that allowed us to take a break.

A little about my background. I grew up in a family of hard-working people who dedicated their lives for their children. My childhood was highly influenced by nature and the always working papa and mama which I think shaped the person I became. I remember going to “datcha” (plot of land for gardening) with my mama and while she worked I was allowed to wander in the pine forest where the moss ground, lonely birches and swampy grounds made me feel like I was in an enchanted forest. I looked for mushrooms, played with tiny frogs and turtles and sometimes helped my mama. She was always understanding of me being a child and would allow me to play as much as possible and so I did, I played in nature and then our outing would be followed by a warm rosehip tea that we brought in a thermos, some pickles, boiled potatoes and and eggs. We ate our lunch in a house that my dad built with my mom and some help from his dad and his brother-in-law. One of many houses that he had helped build in his life!

My father who was one the most hard-working as well as most positive person in my life grew up in a small village of no more than 30 households that established around a spring-fed pond, always had chores to do when he was a kid such as picking cherries, taking the cow out to pasture and many others, and he grew into an inventive, ingenuous, happy, and most hard-working man. He used to say “Everything I do I do for you ( me and my brother)” and he did. He didn’t have an easy life. He served in the army for 2 years in the northern part of Russia where the winters were harsh and days were short. He then had a hard and hazardous job that he worked his whole life never questioning whether he liked the job or not. His work collective was his close community, similar to family.  The work provided his family with food and shelter and that’s what mattered. It was also his job that demanded him and many others to do something that affected his health in a major way. In April of 1986 when the biggest nuclear disaster of all time happened, he had to be one of the many unlucky liquidators to clean up the mess and risk their health. Life kept throwing tough challenges at him but through it all his positive attitude and love of life ensured that he got to live many more years although certainly not enough. He even finally made his dream of singing come true as an only male singer in a local choir! He had a tough but good life. Thanks to him growing up in the village and my grandparents living there, I was lucky to have the childhood I had.

I spent every summer in the village, helping with some chores but mostly playing out in nature with my sweet cousin Yana and many other kids. We pretty much had no adult supervision so we had a chance to exercise our judgement skills in nature and with people. We navigated to the river kilometers away and swam there while the leeches stuck to our legs, those were the times when life jackets and sun screens didn't exist at least in our worlds, we made campfires at night where we sang songs and told stories, we marveled at the night sky and stole neighbors’ watermelons as such was the summer tradition. There was no time and not much interest for the TV as all the fun was happening outdoors. Life was great for us kids and amidst nature!

My father was a big gardener too and it was only later in life that I realized how much I crave working with the soil, planting trees and taking care of them after years of passive observation how trees grow, years of climbing them and appreciating their fruit wormy and covered in dust but always organic and years of helping my parents with the garden chores I now understand I am a person of the land, soil, trees….I am a nature person. Thank you my mama and my papa although he won’t read this but I know that he knew how thankful I am, thankful for the childhood I had, for their love, dedication and for making sure I spent plenty of time in nature.

The easy going childhood seems like a distant dream now. Life is different now. Schedules are hard to keep track of, traffic or being in a car instead of two feet seems to be an inevitable part of the everyday life and the hardest part of it all is seeing how the Earth is hurting. It’s hurting from the human’s shortsightedness about the future, our never ending consumerism, the big companies convincing people who love the Earth just as much as me, to do the things that hurt it and affect every being’s well being such as spraying pesticides, fill landfills with garbage, cut forests, push the wild animals to the very edge and so on. It seems almost impossible to live a life in harmony with nature the way we live or maybe it is where we live. Being vegan for ethical reasons and out of respect and care for Earth, eating organic, having a garden, being aware and thoughtful about the impact of our actions on our children’s future doesn’t seem to be enough for us, so we have been on a journey learning about the most sustainable and regenerative ways of life. I have studied permaculture, we learned a lot about regenerative and successful communities and decided that for our family the best decision would be to live in a eco-village set away from pollution, with clean water source, one that utilizes permaculture principles, where natural construction is used (such as cob, straw bale etc.), organic garden is maintained for most of the food, animals, if any, get to live out their lives in as free settings as possible and most of all where people are united together and act as a family. Community. Nature.

The goal is to see some natural wonders, explore eco-villages and have a nice time together. We started our journey though the wild and remote areas of Eastern Oregon, where we were lucky to observe the wild horses. The family that we saw seemed so happy to have the freedom to run free, to play and be together with their community…freedom is hard to beat! We visited many wild and some developed hot springs in Oregon and Idaho. The hot springs filled our physical bodies with the needed minerals and our minds with peace. One hot spring in Idaho’s Sawtooth mountain was on a river that was full of gold specks so we were literally soaking in gold, pretty wild! Nature is magnificent! We then traveled to the world’s first national park - Yellowstone and saw earth’s many wondrous expressions! Hot springs, geysers, bison and a swan in the middle of a turquoise lake…Earth is plentiful! Our next natural stop was to visit Chris’s brother and his family. It has been a while..too long. How wonderful it is to be with the family and share dinners and laughter together!

I feel separated by distance from many of my dear people so writing about our journey and sharing picture feels like a great way to stay in touch 😊 There will be more stories to share 😊

[Photos](https://photos.app.goo.gl/Ur7BFV85NxXiCuhu8)
