---
layout: post
title: "The World In Our Hands"
author: "Chris"
categories: community, travel, europe, germany, denmark, sweden
tags: [chris]
image: 2023-08-27-the-world-in-our-hands.jpg
---

Apologies for the delay in updates since the start of the trip, it's been quite a ride so far. We are taking the planned halfway break from travel visiting family and friends in Ukraine and finally found the time and to finish a post. Here's an update on the EU destinations so far and some photos at the end. Sending good vibes to all! 🎶❤️ 

## Germany
   - Munich area - We arrived in Munich jet-lagged and were warmly welcomed by our incredibly hospitable friends whom we met in Sacramento years ago. They took us to a lake with a beer garden (of course) and promised we would try some of the best bread in the world, which after tasting artisan bread from a number of countries... seems to be true. The grain came from a field near the bakery and most loaves were dark and sourdough. We'd probably visit again just to eat the bread. One thing we noticed where we visited in Bavaria was small field sizes compared to other countries, with wildflowers planted along the edges of the field. From what we have seen, herbicides do not seem to be used widely on public land or around crops. The water also tasted very clean and we were ensured by our friends of the high quality of the water in their area. Some other points to note were the difficulty of using foreign credit cards and complexity of some self-service kiosks, and the seemingly spotless appearance of public places around Bavaria.
   - [GEN Europe Gathering](https://ecovillagegathering.org/) - The GEN (Global Ecovillage Network) Europe gathering took place this year at [Nature Community](https://nature.community/). Our gathering experience is hard to put into words but to try and share, here's a [video from GEN Europe](https://youtu.be/syxFDTvYHDI?si=JtYmoQYqODTFtrDG). Overall, it was energizing and informative, inspiring and fulfilling. Apart from the interesting workshops (one of our favorites was [this lecture](https://youtu.be/pTVw4AOiQv4?si=EQ022Y4W0m_E0T2M) on a new definition of prosperity) and people, we enjoyed the organic, vegan outdoor meals shared with the community of 800 or so paticipants and the fresh spring water on tap set in the quaint Bavarian village of Schönsee. For the kids, they seemed at home in community, disappearing for hours at a time, gaining confidence and friends from around the world. As hoped, the connections and knowledge gained have already refined our plans for the rest of the trip.

## Denmark
   - Copenhagen - the "smallest" big city we've ever visited. There seemed to be more bikes than cars, with an extensive bike path network, including in more rural areas. It's a bike paradise - bike paths, protected bike lanes, bike traffic signals... who wouldn't want to bike in a place like that? Copenhagen had lots of charm, including some of the best plant-based treats we've ever had (fleurbolle, chocolate croissants, and danishes... which they call 'Vienna bread'). The only unpleasant thing was all the smoking in public places, which seemed to be excessive for what we're used to experiencing. The best part was the kindness, consideration, patience and good nature of the Danes we met. Two of the communities we visited were thanks to the personal connections made at the gathering.
   - [Dyssekilde](http://www.dyssekilde.dk/uk) - also called an "organic village", is Denmark's oldest ecovillage of 30+ years with a community of about 200 people and less than 100 houses which grew from a potato field. It's now a unique collection of eco and natural homes, gardens and play areas throughout, and some local enterprises (bakery, store, restaurant, etc). Along with eco buildings, they have green infrastructure including an approved willow greywater treatment system and a windmill that generates more power than the community uses. They have grown and become more like a sustainable traditional neighborhood which has inspired many, including a new similar community across the street. The coastal location is near the sandy beaches of the North Sea with refreshingly cold water that Danes seem to enjoy. Some of us especially enjoyed seeing wheat fields full of corn flowers and poppies, and wildflowers planted alongside fields. Riding bikes in the area was pure joy.
   - [Avnø Oasis](https://avno-oasis.dk/) - the most closely connected community we have been to so far with 10-20 people sharing 3 meals a day and living in multi-story former dormitory buildings. It felt like a big family with incredible facilities and potential. Like many Danish ecovillages, the community is hosting a Ukrainian refugee family with a 1 year old who was born there. It was beautiful to see how everyone in the group treated the baby as a family member and how much positivity she added to daily life. As guests, we helped out in the kitchen and got some experience cooking for groups. Their kitchen follows the macrobiotic diet and is strictly organic although low in fruit, so we supplemented with wild cherry plums in the area. We also noted the use of vinegar in kitchen for sanitizing which they said is approved in Denmark for commercial kitchens. Our boys thrived in the close-knit community.
   - [Hallingelille](https://www.hallingelille.dk) - similar in concept to Dyssekilde as a car-free, planned neighborhood with individual eco homes and shared land, common house, garden, pond, and playground. They also started decades ago with an open field and planted a larger part of their land as a native forest. We enjoyed the fresh produce from the garden and pleasant stay in the common house. Our boys were excited to care for the pet horses who live next to the community.
## Sweden
   - Malmö - our first stop in Sweden was a [veganic permaculture farm](https://www.biocyclic-vegan.org/partners/processors-and-traders/villands-vanga-vegantradgard/) where we heard once again how the use of animals in closed loop permaculture design is not feasible - [more info on veganic farming](https://online.eou.edu/resources/article/veganic-farming-importance-of-sustainable-agriculture/). We also learned to use public transportation to avoid hefty tolls across bridges. Arriving in Malmö, there were a few obvious differences from previous cities - more cars, more diversity, and mobile/card payment required everywhere, and as anticipated, the most delicious vegan desserts.
   - Stockholm - We stayed in a variety of places - an apartment and 2 campgrounds. One had a cozy communal kitches, sauna, swimming lake, trails, and all kinds of activities. The other campground was more basic but still had a shared kitchen. We took public transit into the city to explore old town including the Royal Palace, Vasa Museum, Medieval Museum, and unforgettable Viking Walking Tour. We also made many stops at the all-you-can-eat vegan buffet at Herman's. Stockholm was busy but beautiful and livable with great transit, clean air and water. While in the area, we stopped by [Understenshojden ecovillage](https://understenshojden.se/om-understenshojden/about-understensvagen/). Some of us were really hoping to see moose, which are plentiful in the area. Sweden has an abundance of forests, parks, and other natural areas, and Stockholm kept this trend. Denmark seemed different in this sense with an apparent lack of wilderness.
   - [Ängsbacka](https://www.angsbacka.com) - we were not sure what to expect when arriving at this busy course and event festival facility with a community of volunteers at what will be the location of next year's GEN gathering. Our host was wonderful and accomodating. We arrived at the wrap up of the festival season and had a spell of Portland winter weather (rain) which is not too common for Swedish summers. The location is excellent, next to a mushroom and huckle/lingonberry-filled forest protected by the "guardian" ticks. We also took a day trip to a nearby spinoff ecovillage. [Sunnemo ecovillage](https://sunnemoecovillage.wixsite.com/sunnemoecovillage?lang=en) sits on a picturesque rolling hill with a forest on one side and lake at the bottom. As we walked through the grass to see one of the interesting buildings, we were shown the signs of a moose bed, likely from the previous night. We walked to a treehouse, a dome, a natural house in progress, then were given the pleasure of sampling "dryck", an one-of-a-kind original family recipe fermented drink.

Our memories of Sweden and Denmark, although often exhausting for the children and us, left us with great memories, impressions, and an idea of what to strive for.
     

[Photos](https://photos.app.goo.gl/r6qWZUxnkX384m5fA)
